Do you remember the joy and freedom of playing
in the sand when you were a kid?
Perhaps you even brought some of your favorite little toys
to the beach and placed them around your sand castle.
Well, believe it or not, you were accessing a
deep part of the mind.
Recently I had the pleasure of experiencing this again,
not at the beach, but in Paula Petrovic's office
where she guides people in sand play for the soul.
The experience is incredibly freeing and revealing,
as well as just plain fun.
She says she's worked with everyone from children
with night terrors to grieving mothers to
powerful executives.
First of all I want to thank you because
you allowed me to have a little session doing
sand play with you, and it was just not only charming,
but also revelationary.
And I think from what I can tell and what I've read
in your book and what I've experienced is that
it seems as though you're offering a playful and
safe way for people to access really profound
subconscious information.
So how did this come into your practice
as an individual and family counselor?
Well, it's an interesting story.
I've been in the field for over 27 years, but at the time in
the early 90's, I had been in the field for about 14 years,
and I happened to run into a lady in Hawaii
who was from Sedona.
And when she heard I was from Sedona she said,
"Could you babysit a box of my personal items for me?"
And I said, "Sure."
Then she decided to stay in Hawaii, and then she asked,
"Well, could you just pack some things and
"send it to me?
"The rest just pack and send to my mother."
So in there was a book by a lady called
Doris Kalff on sand play.
I read the introduction, and I was absolutely mesmerized.
And also in that box were some miniatures.
So at the time I was married to a really wonderful man
who actually sponsored me for many years with my work,
and he had left this really funky studio.
And I said, "I have to live here."
I didn't know why, so when I read the introduction
to this incredible book, I was in love.
And so I said I have to go on an experimental journey
because I really knew nothing about sand play
or sand play therapy.
So I went on my journey for a few years and had some of
the most amazing clients.
And one was a little Tibetan boy who was reported to be
a first companion of an important future Lama.
And so he went into the sand tray, and he went to
different timelines, multiple realities.
He just went to town, he was in love,
and I was looking at how all of this stuff came through.
And then right after that I had another little boy
who actually had horrendous nightmares for the first,
after the age of one for four years straight he had
horrendous nightmares, and he could not sleep
through the night.
When the mom and him came in, both of them were
ready for a nervous breakdown.
He walked to my sand tray, and he, it was like he went
into this other world, and he went to town dealing with
the demons that were keeping him awake at night.
He had these night terrors.
And he just went to town, and it was amazing
the journey he went on.
And then after that I came across a lady who was
a heavy smoker, and she wanted to quit smoking.
And after one session she found out why she was
smoking three packs a day, got the connection.
And what I heard from her afterwards she stopped smoking.
And there was a series of these kind of events
the first year that I was just experimenting
using sand play.
And after that I knew there was something profound
happening in the sand tray, and that people were able to
talk to their souls, or that knowing place,
that place that I say has all the answers,
it's a place of knowing that we often don't tap into.
When a person goes to, speaks with that place in
three-dimensional form by creating scenes in the sand tray,
the doors that open in their mind, body and spirit,
I'm still in awe to this day.
I don't know how it happens, but something totally
opens for people.
And it doesn't matter who you are, how old you are,
what your life situation, whether you're a scientist
or a child dealing with night terrors, or a teacher
or a housewife, it does not matter.
Everybody has this place, and there is something magical
about the sand tray, as you've had a taste the other day.
No, it is absolutely magical, and first of all,
it's a real relief to come in and see a lot of your
childhood favorite images, and it immediately takes you
into this place of joy.
I think that's number, now I don't know.
I mean, if you're drawing a lot of really dark
kind of images maybe it's not so much joy as familiarity,
but it seemed to me to be very comforting
and very joyful to be able to gather up these little images
of familiar objects from the past.
Well, it's actually interesting you brought out
about the dark energies.
I had one client, a lady came in and she was in
absolute terror even before she did her sand tray.
And so I gave her permission that we didn't have to
do anything if it was too frightening for her,
but she says, well we talked for awhile,
and she said, no I'm ready.
So she started picking items, and when we started to do
the facilitation and start the journey to see what this was
all about for her, she says, "Oh, these miniatures
"are really terrifying for me."
And I said, "Well, do all the miniatures terrify you?"
She goes, "Oh, no."
She says, "This one is different."
So we started to explore the miniatures that felt really
comfortable with her, and as she started to explore those
she started to stand up, feel empowered and
not so frightened.
And then from that place we started to look at the
miniatures that she was scared of, and of course she said,
"Why are these miniatures no longer scary?"
And I says, "Because you came from your empowered place,
"a place that's not fearful."
So when you come from a non-fear place dealing with
the fear versus coming from a place of fear and
dealing with the fear, it's a whole different ball of wax.
And I wanna get into some of the other
types of experiences you've had and types of people
you've dealt with, but let's just back up a moment.
Where did sand play originate?
OK, sand play originated with a pediatrician
from England in the 1920's.
She was part British and part Polish, and she went to
war torn Poland and discovered that kids that were playing
with sticks and stones in the sand seemed to regroup
and heal quicker from the trauma of war than kids
who did not.
So she says, "Ah, I've got an idea."
So she moved from like pediatrics and started to get
more in the counseling realm, and she discovered
as they went on this journey that kids that got to
express the terror and the fear that they got from war,
and they got to put it out there in the sand tray,
and deal with their demons, and then they were able to
shift and move into a healthier place because
the place that I feel has all the answers helped them
work through the trauma through the three-dimensional play.
And then Jung came along a little later on,
and he played with sand and to work through his issues.
So it just kind of evolved into this whole thing,
and then the Jungians got involved,
but it started with this pediatrician in the 1920's.
And are there many other people
doing this at this time?
Yeah, sand play therapy per se, there is a handful
of people scattered around.
It's becoming more and more and more.
I have taken it to a slightly different level.
I don't do it so much for clinical and assessment.
I leave that to the people that are really focused that way.
I discovered sand play for the soul by bringing that
other element that's always at work I feel in therapy,
but this other element which I say the knowing place
of the soul.
That's just the words that came to me when I wrote the book,
is that that place helps you take your awareness and knowing
to yet a higher level.
And when all of the power within ourselves is behind
the discovery, you get that much more information,
which makes things go quicker.
So let's talk about some of the types of
experiences and clients you've had.
You've mentioned a couple, but one in your book
that was interesting.
It was a pretty powerful man, macho,
macho superman guy
(Regina laughs)
Oh, you're talking about the corporate exec.
The one that wanted to leave as soon as
he came in and saw he was sitting down with--
Oh yes, yes, yes, yes.
a bunch of little toys
and a woman, and he thought--
Yes, yes, yes, yes.
no, this is stupid, I'm outta here.
Yeah.
Tell us about that if you don't mind.
You don't have to name names obviously.
Well, that's OK, the names in the book are totally--
Fictitious.
fictitious.
They're real people, but for privacy I did not
use their names.
Right.
So let's talk about macho man.
Yeah, Matt came in having really no idea what he had
gotten himself into.
Now how did he even end up calling you?
He was connected with an organization that were organizing
some retreats in Sedona, and I happened to be one of his
stops on this personal growth retreat that he had
selected to do.
So he didn't really know what it was.
He had no idea, and the woman who had organized it
didn't really say anything.
I guess she had an intuitive knowing not to tell this guy
because he probably wouldn't have signed up.
It sounds like he was ready to walk
when he got here.
Well, yes he was because when he came inside he thought,
my god, there's all these miniatures and a sand tray.
I'm gonna play in a sandbox?
Me, a corporate executive?
A high powered profile person?
I don't think so.
So fortunately I jumped into the humor part,
which I do use a lot of humor, especially for people
that are a little nervous because it's like what the heck
are you getting me into?
So fortunately something I said and did at the time
helped him relax, and he gave himself permission
to just go for it.
And so the minute he started to really look at
the miniatures this whole other part of him,
a part of him that has always wanted to get his attention,
which is the playful fun part, and being in his position,
and also from his childhood background being someone
who's had a lot of responsibilities as a young child,
playing, letting go and having fun is just something
that wasn't part of his world.
Yet something inside was saying we need to really
open that part of me, and he just somehow,
and I think that knowing part is what really helped him stay
after we did a little bit of talking.
And so he went on a journey--
Cajoling.
Right, and he made some
very powerful discoveries that he had a sense about,
but seeing it in the three-dimensional reality just really
anchored and said yes, that is what's going on with me.
And that recognition opened this vast amount of emotions
inside of him that had had him feeling really repressed,
but then it just burst free, he released it,
and then we went on this really fun journey.
And he was absolutely shocked that playing in the sand
for a little over an hour could reveal so much so quickly,
and make him feel really connected to his soul.
And of course, he didn't know me from Adam,
so the fact that this could all happen in less than
90 minutes was a surprise for him.
So that's the real fun thing about sand play.
You don't have to know me.
You walk in, and your soul is right there,
that knowing place, and it just goes and starts to
play and create, and suddenly, it's that place where
all the visionaries come from, and all the great
visionaries and inventors.
They come from that highly place of knowing.
Highly intuitive where, you tell people
when they come in that you just start choosing.
You just start putting them in a basket.
You don't think about it, don't question it,
just put them in a basket, the rest will be revealed.
Exactly.
So it gives people permission to not be wrong--
Exactly, exactly.
in their choice.
Now I have a question on that whole subject.
I was thinking about it, reflecting on it,
that I set the intention to ask for what I need to know
at this specific phase of my journey in life.
Yeah, I do that with everybody when they first start.
And what happens if you,
can you see a very pronounced change say if I came back
a week later, and I was in a little different frame of mind?
Maybe had a different emphasis going on at that time.
Would it be a different kind of reading for me,
or would it have a lot of the same principal parts?
Well, it would depend on what's up for you
at that moment in time.
If you remember, what do I most need to know about
my life at this time, show me the way.
So whatever is up for you at that moment.
For some it might be a carryover.
There might be more pieces to that particular issue
that you need to like focus on,
or it could be a whole different ballgame.
For some it just takes them that much deeper
to another level of awareness within themselves.
It really, every person that walks through the door,
I do not have a preconceived idea what's gonna happen.
It's literally as if their soul and my soul are
communicating through the sand tray,
and then we start to have a dialog.
And it's the person's soul, the person themselves
that actually come up with all the answers,
with all the awareness.
I merely facilitate and help pull the information out
and help guide them on the journey.
But really it's their soul talking with my soul,
but it's their soul that really answers and reveals
whatever they need to have revealed.
Can you give me a couple more examples
of some of the more profound things you've witnessed
here in the sand tray among people?
Some of your favorite, a couple of your favorite stories.
One was a woman, and it's in my book, who lost her son
two years ago, and it sent her in such a profound,
powerful place of grieving and loss that
when it came to her to come to the studio she had actually
almost turned into an alcoholic.
She almost moved into full blown alcoholism,
and part of her treatment program was coming for
a sand tray session.
And when she came in she said her son had come to her
in a dream and said that he was gonna be with her
during this session.
It turned out that his energy and his connection to him
kind of worked its way through and was part of
the session with her.
And so she had a dialog with her son
symbolically through the sand tray,
and it just moved her healing to a whole new level.
And he gave her bits of wisdom and information
that just helped, she'd already been on the road to healing
because she was in this treatment program,
but it added a few little extra pieces that really brought
home to her where she needed to be now in her life,
and that it was time for her to move beyond the grieving,
and that she really felt that he was always
gonna be present.
Another very profound thing was there was this psychologist
who was a drug and alcohol rehab person.
Oh, interesting.
And he got lost in drugs and alcohol.
And from that session he tapped into a part of him
that had been totally shut down for many years.
And the other part that took over was this deep void
inside of him, and he hadn't given himself permission
to tap into this part of him that could help him
feel more complete.
So when he tapped into it, and I won't give you the details
'cause I don't wanna, you know, keep the story a surprise,
you have to buy the book, but when he created,
he created two scenes, one from this very dark place,
and then I was guided to give him permission to create it
from this other part.
So when this other part redid his scene, he moved to a
whole other level of understanding within himself,
and that healthy more actualized part helped him see
what he was doing and realize where he really
needed to be in life.
And he had never, ever given himself permission
to open this aspect of him, I think it was from
the age of 12 or something,
that after that he totally shut down.
So he awakened, actually it was a 14-year-old boy
inside of him, so he awakened that part,
and it just moved him to a whole other level.
The last I'd heard, but it's been a few years,
he ended up, he was in total recovery and
stayed in recovery.
And he used aspects of what he learnt from here
to incorporate it into his own counseling.
And so the beauty of this is that because
it's coming from a deep childlike subconscious part
of the being, it never lies.
Never lies, absolutely.
I've never, I have done thousands of sand trays,
and I've never seen a sand tray lie because that innocent
pure place, the soul place, that innocent childlike place
is so pure it needs to prove nothing to anyone,
it just is.
And in that just is place you're not affected by
past preconditioning.
You're not affected by future fears.
If you look at children, they are very much in the moment
and very spontaneous,
at least for the early part of their life.
So when you're in that place of knowing that's very
spontaneous and just is, boom.
it's the wisdom and the insight just phew,
comes right through.
And what better way, I think of this expression,
a teaspoon of honey or sugar helps the medicine go down.
Right, very true.
What a neat way to have fun but have revealing information
brought forth, and to do it in such a playful easy way.
I mean, in this day and age what an exciting fun way
to get information so quickly and easily
and have fun at the same time.
I mean, that's a concept.
Yeah, that's a concept for you.
Everything's so serious and stressed around the world
at the moment that it really is a very gentle,
playful, wonderful relief.
What about, OK, if a person were to pick up a copy
of your book, order a copy of your book,
and they read through it, would they be able,
for example, to set up an environment in their own home
to work with their own children?
They could work with themselves.
The book is designed to do it for yourself.
There may be, there will probably be another book where
I'll get a little more in depth because it is a very
powerful process, so you do want to be in a certain
frame of mind when you do it.
But my experience is the soul never takes you
where you're not ready to go.
And what it does is whether kids do it with a mom,
just has a kid work it through, I don't recommend that
they analyze or do therapeutic.
You really need to have a trained professional for that,
but when you're talking with your soul,
anybody has that right to talk with their soul,
whether they do it in meditation, they do it through dance,
or they do it through writing a book.
It does not matter.
I present opportunities for people to do a version of
what I do with others for themselves,
to allow that three-dimensionality through their
knowing place to speak to them.
And they don't even have to have a sand tray.
It could be a sacred alter, it could be through journaling.
I present alternatives to doing sand play,
but if they are drawn to the sand, I mean they could even
do it on the beach, they can do it in their garden.
How many people have special little areas in their house
where they have certain knick knacks that are
very important and profound for them?
I mean, it's like they can communicate with that
part of themselves.
I'll give you an example.
There is a picture that, a photo of my godchild Olivia
when she was one month old.
And every time I look at that photo I,
the innocence and purity within side of me is activated.
And that is under the purity and innocence which is
one of the sacred seven that I mention in my book.
And I did a self tray before I actually wrote the book,
and those sacred seven is actually what helped me
write the book 'cause otherwise the book would have
never get written.
So parts of myself came forth through these sacred seven,
and they came up with all kinds of fun spiritual wisdoms,
idea, techniques, all kinds of things came forth
through that sacred seven, and that part's in my book.
So that picture, for example, someone may have a photo
that is just, when they look at it they just feel,
they feel the purity and innocence, you know,
that mother-child bond.
It's like, it just suddenly they can't help but be
in that place when they look at that photo.
So what would happen if you did a self-facilitation
and brought information forth to give a more complete
picture of who you are in the scheme of your life?
So there's lots of stories in the book that just by osmosis
of reading those stories you will automatically start to
be able to open that dialog with yourself.
Plus there's a how-to component where I give
specific examples on how you could start working with
that energy for yourself,
whether you use a sand tray or not.
It does not matter.
it's about opening the communication with your soul.
When you do it from that quality of a three-dimensionality,
we are living in a three dimensional world, you know,
so it just helps anchor it more than when it's just
in the abstract in our mind.
It just brings concrete tangible expression for us,
and it's easier to understand the mind from
that place of three-dimensional.
Right, and how many people don't enjoy
playing in the sand on the beach?
I mean as a little kid, if anyone's ever been near sand,
the first thing you do is you start making things
and expressing your creativity through it.
And developing that, it seems what you were saying
a moment ago is, for example, looking at the little picture
of your godchild Olivia,
and it brought this great joy to you.
Just that experience alone seems to me to be the
sacred place to start creating your own desires from,
just to have that inspired, and then go into the
creative process from that innocence and joy.
You're reading my mind because when you start sand play,
the purity and innocence, you right away start,
I'm getting goose bumps now, you're right away
starting from a clean slate, from that purity and innocence.
And before you even create your sand tray scene
that's what happens.
People automatically are in that place.
And then as they do, all doors open,
and then you go on a journey because there's
so many things we can be faulting ourselves for.
There's an expression, we can do nine things right
and one thing wrong.
What are we gonna focus on?
Well, when you do a sand tray you focus on,
you begin with a clean slate, and then everything,
all kinds of journeys and all kinds of adventures
become possible.
And when you come from that innocent open place
of knowing, which is the knowing place of the soul,
that's how I experience it, when you come from that place
it's like all kinds of answers can come forth
so quickly and easily.
And how often do we even allow ourselves that possibility?
Oh, very seldom, we're so busy with
ticking off our little tasks lists in life.
Whether it's a vacation or work or house cleaning,
it's always a to do list.
Yeah, and the feeling, the guilt, the shame,
everything we carry forth that holds us back from
becoming the bigger picture of who we are.
None of that's in the sand tray.
I mean, issues do come up, don't get me wrong,
like this lady had tremendous fear,
but that's real for people.
But boy, if you can put that in the sand tray
and transmute that and move it to a higher place
of evolvement where you move beyond the shame,
and you really see what really happened,
and it's nothing what you thought it was,
and what really happened actually absolves you
and allows you to really move into a place of truth.
And when you're in that place of truth you can quickly
resolve those kinks in your life that have caused you
a lot of pain.
And there are some stories in there that are kind of
heavy duty stories, but at the end they are so powerful
and wonderful, that people come through really dark places,
and they move to this higher place of awareness they never
even thought was possible because the pain was
so big in them, but when they really saw what was
really going on and what that pain was really about,
bam, they just instantly shifted to a whole other place.
I mean, what is that worth?
For those of you who are intrigued but can't make it
to a sand tray, you can also pick up a copy of her book
titled Sand Play for the Soul.
Until next time, thanks for watching.
(new age music)